(H.R. Rep. No. 97- 835, 97th Congress, Second Session). Accordingly, Federal regulation requires such procedures to be detailed in the HCP [50 CFR 17.22(b)(1)(iii)(C)]. At the same time the legislative history states that: The Committee intends that the Secretary may utilize this provision to approve conservation plans which provide long-term commitments regarding the conservation of listed as well as unlisted species and long-term assurances to the proponent of the conservation plan that the terms of the plan will be 3-27  adhered to and that further mitigation requirements will only be imposed in accordance with the terms of the plan. In the event that an unlisted species addressed in the approved conservation plan is subsequently listed pursuant to the Act, no further mitigation requirements should be imposed if the conservation plan addressed the conservation of the species and its habitat as if the species were listed pursuant to the Act." (H.R. Report No. 97-835, 97th Congress, Second Session, and 50 FR 39681-39691.) This Congressional history illustrates the potential tension between two primary goals of the HCP program: (1) adequately minimizing and mitigating for the incidental take of listed species, and (2) providing regulatory assurances to section 10 permittees that the terms of an approved HCP will not change over time, or that necessary changes will be minimized to the extent possible, and will be agreed to by the applicant. How to reconcile these objectives remains one of the central challenges of the HCP program. "Unforeseen circumstances," also referred to as "extraordinary circumstances," in the past have been broadly defined to include a variety of changing circumstances that may occur over the life of an ongoing HCP. However, it is important to distinguish between the terms "unforeseen circumstances," or "extraordinary circumstances," versus "changed circumstances." "Changed circumstances" are not uncommon during the course of an HCP and can reasonably be anticipated and planned for (e.g., the listing of new species, modifications in the project or activity as described in the original HCP, or modifications in the HCP's monitoring program).

"Unforeseen circumstances" or "extraordinary circumstances" however, means changes in circumstances surrounding an HCP that were not or could not be anticipated by HCP participants and the Services, that result in a substantial and adverse change in the status of a covered species. With respect to anticipated and possible changed circumstances, the HCP should discuss measures developed by the applicant and the Services to meet such changes over time, possibly by incorporating adaptive management measures for covered species in the HCP. HCP planners should identify potential problems in advance and identify specific strategies or protocols in the HCP for dealing with them, so that adjustments can be made as necessary without having to amend the HCP. The "Unforeseen/Extraordinary Circumstances" section of the HCP should be more limited. It should discuss how those changes in the circumstances surrounding the HCP that cannot effectively be anticipated by HCP negotiators will be dealt with in the future. It must also be consistent with the Department of Interior's and Department of Commerce's "No Surprises" policy. a. The "No Surprises" Policy. 3-28 To address the problem of maintaining regulatory assurances and providing regulatory certainty in exchange for conservation commitments, the Department of the Interior (DOI) and Department of Commerce (DOC) have jointly established a "No Surprises" policy for HCPs. The "No Surprises" policy sets forth a clear commitment by the FWS, NMFS, DOI, and DOC that, to the extent consistent with the requirements of the Endangered Species Act and other Federal laws, the government will honor its agreements under an approved HCP for which the permittee is in good faith implementing the HCP's terms and conditions.

The specific nature of these provisions will vary among HCPs depending upon individual habitat and species needs. The "No Surprises" policy provides certainty for private landowners in ESA Habitat Conservation Planning through the following assurances: o In negotiating "unforeseen circumstances" provisions for HCPs, the Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service shall not require the commitment of additional land or financial compensation beyond the level of mitigation which was otherwise adequately provided for a species under the terms of a properly functioning HCP. Moreover, FWS and NMFS shall not seek any other form of additional mitigation from an HCP permittee except under extraordinary circumstances. This means that if unforeseen circumstances occur during the life of an HCP, the FWS and NMFS will not require additional lands, additional funds, or additional restrictions on lands or other natural resources released for development or use, from any permittee, who in good faith, is adequately implementing or has implemented an approved HCP. Once a permit has been issued and its terms are being complied with, the permittee may remain secure regarding the agreed upon cost of mitigation, because no additional mitigation land, funding, or land use restrictions will be requested by the Services. The policy also protects the permittee from any other forms of additional mitigation, except where extraordinary circumstance exist. Other methods of responding to the needs of the affected species, such as government action and voluntary conservation measures by the permittee, remain available to assure the requirements of the ESA are satisfied. Consequently, the "No Surprises" policy also provides that: o If additional mitigation measures are subsequently deemed necessary to provide for the conservation of a species that was otherwise adequately covered under the terms of a properly functioning HCP, the obligation for such measures shall not rest with the HCP permittee. 3-29 This means that in cases where the status of a species addressed under an HCP worsens, the primary obligation for implementing additional conservation measures would be borne by the Federal government, other governmental agencies, private conservation organizations, or other private landowners who have not yet developed an HCP. "Adequately covered" for listed species refers to any species addressed in an HCP which has satisfied the permit issuance criteria under section 10(a)(2)(B) of the ESA.

For unlisted species, the term refers to any species which is addressed in an HCP as if it were listed pursuant to section 4 of the ESA, and in which HCP conditions for that species would satisfy permit issuance criteria under section 10(a)(2)(B) of the ESA if the species were listed. "No Surprises" assurances apply only to species that are adequately covered in the HCP. Species should not be included in the HCP permit if data gaps or insufficient information makes it impossible to craft conservation/mitigation measures for them. Such data gaps can be overcome, however, through the inclusion of adaptive management clauses in the HCP (See Chapter 3, Section 3.B(g)). o If extraordinary circumstances warrant the requirement of additional mitigation from an HCP permittee who is in compliance with the HCP's obligations, such mitigation shall maintain the original terms of the HCP to the maximum extent possible. Further, any such changes shall be limited to modifications within Conserved Habitat areas or to the HCP's operating conservation program for the affected species. Additional mitigation requirements shall not involve the payment of additional compensation or apply to parcels of land available for development or land management under the original terms of the HCP without the consent of the HCP permittee. This means that if extraordinary circumstances are found to exist, the Services will consider additional mitigation measures; however, such measures must be as close as possible to the terms of the original HCP and must be limited to modifications within Conserved Habitat areas or the HCP's operating conservation program or to lands that are already protected by the HCP. New mitigation measures should not include requirements for additional land protection, payment of funds, or apply to lands available for development or use under the HCP, unless the permittee consents to such additional measures. "Modifications within Conserved Habitat areas or to the HCP's operating conservation program" means limiting such changes to plan areas explicitly designated for habitat protection or other conservation uses, or redirecting or increasing the intensity, range, or effectiveness of conservation efforts in such areas, provided that any such changes do not impose new restrictions or financial compensation on the permittee's activities.

o The FWS and NMFS shall not seek additional mitigation for a species from an HCP permittee where the terms of a properly functioning HCP agreement were designed to provide an overall net benefit for that species and contained measurable criteria for the biological success of the HCP which have been or are being met. This provision means that the Services will not attempt to impose additional mitigation measures of any type where and HCP was intentionally designed to have a net positive impact upon a species. It is intended to encourage HCP applicants to develop HCPs that provide an overall net benefit to affected species. It does not mean that any HCP must in 3-31 fact have already achieved a net benefit before the "No Surprises" policy applies. Rather, the achievement of such benefits should be measured through a clearly articulated set of biological goals and an adequate monitoring program for measuring progress for achieving those goals. "Properly functioning HCP" means any HCP whose provisions have been or are being fully implemented by the permittee and in which the permittee is in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. o Nothing in this policy shall be construed to limit or constrain the Services or any other governmental agency from taking additional actions at its own expense to protect or conserve a species included in an HCP. This means the Services can intercede on behalf of a species at their own expense at any time and be consistent with the assurances provided the permittee under this policy and the permit. Neither is there anything in the "No Surprises" policy that prevents the Services from requesting a permittee to voluntarily undertake additional mitigation on behalf of affected species, though of course the permittee is under no obligation to comply. FWS and NMFS have a wide array of authorities and resources that can be utilized to provide additional protection for threatened or endangered species included in an HCP.

To the extent maximum that the minimization and mitigation program can be demonstrated to provide substantial benefits to the species, less emphasis can be placed on the second factor. However, particularly where the adequacy of the mitigation is a close call, the record must contain some basis to conclude that the proposed program is the maximum that can be reasonably required by that applicant. This may require weighing the costs of implementing additional mitigation, benefits and costs of implementing additional mitigation, the amount of mitigation provided by other applicants in similar situations, and the abilities of that particular applicant. Analysis of the alternatives that would require additional mitigation 7-3 in the HCP and NEPA analysis, including the costs to the applicant is often essential in helping the Services make the required finding. 3. The applicant will ensure that adequate funding for the HCP and procedures to deal with unforeseen circumstances will be provided. These issuance criteria are identical to HCP requirements discussed in Chapter 3. The Services must ensure that funding sources and levels proposed by the applicant are reliable and will meet the purposes of the HCP, and that measures to deal with unforeseen circumstances are adequately addressed. Without such findings, the section 10 permit cannot be issued. Examples of funding mechanisms and methods of ensuring funding are discussed in Chapter 3, Section B.6. The "Unforeseen or Extraordinary Circumstances " discussion in the HCP must be consistent with the joint Department of Interior/Department of Commerce "No Surprises" policy and should impose no higher standard on the permit applicant with respect to unforeseen circumstances than that described under this policy (see Chapter 3, Section B.5(a)). 4. The taking will not appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival and recovery of the species in the wild. This is a critically important criterion for incidental take permits because it establishes a fundamental "threshold" standard for any listed species affected by an HCP.

In addition to will be provided; (iv) the taking will the general conditions set forth in part not appreciably reduce the likelihood 13 of this subchapter, every permit of the survival and recovery of the spe- issued under this paragraph shall be cies in the wild; (v) the measures, if subject to the special condition that any, required under paragraph the escape of living wildlife covered by (b)(1)(iii)(D) of this section will be met; the permit shall be immediately re- and (vi) he has received such other as- ported to the Service office designated surances as he may require that the in the permit. plan will be implemented. In making (4) Duration of permits. The duration his decision, the Director shall also of permits issued under this paragraph consider the anticipated duration and shall be designated on the face of the geographic scope of the applicant’s permit. planned activities, including the 220 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serv., Interior § 17.22 amount of listed species habitat that is gram, the permittee will implement involved and the degree to which listed the measures specified in the plan. species and their habitats are affected. (ii) Changed circumstances not provided (3) Permit conditions. In addition to for in the plan. If additional conserva- the general conditions set forth in part tion and mitigation measures are 13 of this subchapter, every permit deemed necessary to respond to issued under this paragraph shall con- changed circumstances and such meas- tain such terms and conditions as the ures were not provided for in the plan’s Director deems necessary or appro- operating conservation program, the priate to carry out the purposes of the Director will not require any conserva- permit and the conservation plan in- tion and mitigation measures in addi- cluding, but not limited to, monitoring tion to those provided for in the plan and reporting requirements deemed without the consent of the permittee, necessary for determining whether provided the plan is being properly im- such terms and conditions are being plemented. complied with.

The Director shall rely (iii) Unforeseen circumstances. (A) In upon existing reporting requirements negotiating unforeseen circumstances, to the maximum extent practicable. the Director will not require the com- (4) Duration of permits. The duration mitment of additional land, water, or of permits issued under this paragraph financial compensation or additional shall be sufficient to provide adequate restrictions on the use of land, water, assurances to the permittee to commit or other natural resources beyond the funding necessary for the activities au- level otherwise agreed upon for the spe- thorized by the permit, including con- cies covered by the conservation plan servation activities and land use re- without the consent of the permittee. strictions. In determining the duration (B) If additional conservation and of a permit, the Director shall consider mitigation measures are deemed nec- the duration of the planned activities, essary to respond to unforeseen cir- as well as the possible positive and neg- cumstances, the Director may require ative effects associated with permits of additional measures of the permittee the proposed duration on listed species, where the conservation plan is being including the extent to which the con- properly implemented, but only if such servation plan will enhance the habitat measures are limited to modifications of listed species and increase the long- within conserved habitat areas, if any, term survivability of such species. or to the conservation plan’s operating (5) Assurances provided to permittee in conservation program for the affected case of changed or unforeseen cir- species, and maintain the original cumstances. The assurances in this terms of the conservation plan to the paragraph (b)(5) apply only to inciden- maximum extent possible. Additional tal take permits issued in accordance conservation and mitigation measures with paragraph (b)(2) of this section will not involve the commitment of ad- where the conservation plan is being ditional land, water or financial com- properly implemented, and apply only pensation or additional restrictions on with respect to species adequately cov- the use of land, water, or other natural ered by the conservation plan. These resources otherwise available for devel- assurances cannot be provided to Fed- opment or use under the original terms eral agencies.

This rule does not apply of the conservation plan without the to incidental take permits issued prior consent of the permittee. to March 25, 1998. The assurances pro- (C) The Director will have the burden vided in incidental take permits issued of demonstrating that unforeseen cir- prior to March 25, 1998 remain in effect, cumstances exist, using the best sci- and those permits will not be revised as entific and commercial data available. a result of this rulemaking. These findings must be clearly docu- (i) Changed circumstances provided for mented and based upon reliable tech- in the plan. If additional conservation nical information regarding the status and mitigation measures are deemed and habitat requirements of the af- necessary to respond to changed cir- fected species. The Director will con- cumstances and were provided for in sider, but not be limited to, the follow- the plan’s operating conservation pro- ing factors: 221 § 17.23 50 CFR Ch. I (10–1–98 Edition) (1) Size of the current range of the af- would: (i) Harm the specimen or popu- fected species; lation involved; or (ii) unduly hinder (2) Percentage of range adversely af- the actions authorized under the per- fected by the conservation plan; mit. (3) Percentage of range conserved by (3) The Service will notify any party the conservation plan; filing an objection and request for no- (4) Ecological significance of that tice under paragraph (c)(1) of this sec- portion of the range affected by the tion of the final action taken on the conservation plan; application, in writing. If the Service (5) Level of knowledge about the af- has reduced or dispensed with the no- fected species and the degree of speci- tice period referred to in paragraph ficity of the species’ conservation pro- (c)(2) of this section, it will include its gram under the conservation plan; and reasons therefore in such written no- (6) Whether failure to adopt addi- tice.

the following: (2) To issue a certificate of inclusion, (1) Reporting requirements or rights the Assistant Administrator must find of inspection for determining whether that: the terms and conditions are being (i) The applicant will be engaged in complied with; the activity covered by the general per- (2) The species and number of ani- mit and mals covered; (ii) The applicant has made adequate (3) The authorized method of taking; assurances that the applicable meas- (4) The procedures to be used to han- ures of the conservation plan will be dle or dispose of any animals taken; funded and implemented. and (g) Assurances provided to permittee in (5) The payment of a fee to reimburse case of changed or unforeseen cir- the National Marine Fisheries Service cumstances. The assurances in this the cost of processing the application. paragraph (g) apply only to incidental (e) Duration of permits. The duration take permits issued in accordance with of permits issued under this section paragraph (c) of this section where the will be such as to provide adequate as- conservation plan is being properly im- surances to the permit holder to com- plemented, and apply only with respect mit funding necessary for the activities to species adequately covered by the 89 § 222.23 50 CFR Ch. II (10–1–98 Edition) conservation plan. These assurances resources otherwise available for devel- cannot be provided to Federal agencies. opment or use under the original terms This rule does not apply to incidental of the conservation plan without the take permits issued prior to March 25, consent of the permittee. 1998. The assurances provided in inci- (iii) NMFS will have the burden of dental take permits issued prior to demonstrating that unforeseen cir- March 25, 1998 remain in effect, and cumstances exist, using the best sci- those permits will not be revised as a entific and commercial data available.

result of this rulemaking. These findings must be clearly docu- (1) Changed circumstances provided for mented and based upon reliable tech- in the plan. If additional conservation nical information regarding the status and mitigation measures are deemed and habitat requirements of the af- necessary to respond to changed cir- fected species. NMFS will consider, but cumstances and were provided for in not be limited to, the following factors: the plan’s operating conservation pro- (A) Size of the current range of the gram, the permittee will implement affected species; the measures specified in the plan. (B) Percentage of range adversely af- (2) Changed circumstances not provided fected by the conservation plan; for in the plan. If additional conserva- (C) Percentage of range conserved by tion and mitigation measures are the conservation plan; deemed necessary to respond to (D) Ecological significance of that changed circumstances and such meas- portion of the range affected by the ures were not provided for in the plan’s conservation plan; operating conservation program, (E) Level of knowledge about the af- NMFS will not require any conserva- fected species and the degree of speci- tion and mitigation measures in addi- ficity of the species’ conservation pro- tion to those provided for in the plan gram under the conservation plan; and without the consent of the permittee, provided the plan is being properly im- (F) Whether failure to adopt addi- plemented. tional conservation measures would ap- (3) Unforeseen circumstances. (i) In ne- preciably reduce the likelihood of sur- gotiating unforeseen circumstances, vival and recovery of the affected spe- NMFS will not require the commit- cies in the wild. ment of additional land, water, or fi- (h) Nothing in this rule will be con- nancial compensation or additional re- strued to limit or constrain the Assist- strictions on the use of land, water, or ant Administrator, any Federal, State, other natural resources beyond the local, or tribal government agency, or level otherwise agreed upon for the spe- a private entity, from taking addi- cies covered by the conservation plan tional actions at its own expense to without the consent of the permittee. protect or conserve a species included (ii) If additional conservation and in a conservation plan.
