These initiatives were based on lessons learned, as well as input from applicants, permittees, conservation organizations, and our own staff. On February 23, 1998, the Services codified a final rule (63 FR 8859) to provide certain regulatory assurances to permittees under section 10(a)(1)(B). These assurances are called “No Surprises” assurances and, essentially, mean that “a deal is a deal.” As long as the permittee is properly implementing the HCP, the Services will not impose additional requirements or restrictions. If an unforeseen circumstance occurs, unless the permittee consents, the Services will not require him/her to commit additional land, water, or financial compensation or impose additional restrictions on the use of land, water, or other natural resources beyond the level agreed to in the HCP. The Services will honor these assurances as long as a permittee is implementing the requirements of the HCP, permit, and other associated documents in good faith and their permitted activities will not jeopardize the species. On June 1, 2000, the Services published the Five-Point Policy (65 FR 35242) as an addendum to the 1996 HCP Handbook. The policy focuses on the expanded use and integration of five components of the HCP program, namely (1) biological goals and objectives, (2) adaptive management, (3) monitoring, (4) permit duration, and (5) public participation. The principles and specifics of this policy have been integrated into this revised Handbook, which supersedes the policy. 1-3 On October 5, 2007, the FWS Director issued a General Conservation Plan Policy to allow FWS staff to prepare general conservation plans (GCP) to streamline the permitting process for project proponents and ensure strategic conservation for covered species.

Remediation in response to changed circumstances is the responsibility of the applicant. Changed and unforeseen circumstances usually have to do with events (e.g., natural disaster, introduction of non-native species, etc.) that occur during the permit term that cannot be controlled. The degree or frequency to which the events occur is generally what separates changed from unforeseen circumstances. 9.6.1 Changed Circumstances The HCP must include a section on changed circumstances that can potentially affect a covered species or geographic area covered by a conservation plan and that can reasonably be anticipated by plan developers and the Services (e.g., the listing of new species, invasion of a non-native species, fire or flooding in an area prone to such events, or where future increases are highly likely, etc.). Changed circumstances should include any significant event that would change the conditions or add threats in the plan area that the applicant can reasonably predict to occur during the permit term. See the changed and unforseen circumstances worksheet for help identifying them. The HCP should describe the modifications in the project or activity that a permittee will implement if such an event occurs during the permit term, with cost estimates (and assured funding) associated with those events. Helpful Hint: it is critical the HCP identifies a suite of potential changed circumstances, the specific response to each, the costs of implementing the response, and the funding assurances for those responses. Changed circumstances and plan responses are treated as part of the operating conservation program. Like other aspects of the conservation program, effectiveness of management actions in reducing the effects of changed circumstances can be improved through implementation of the monitoring and adaptive management programs.

9-36 If additional or alternate conservation measures are necessary to respond to changed circumstances, and such measures are not part of the responses to changed circumstances provided in the plan, the Services and the permittee should work together to shift priorities to best meet goals and objectives within the original resource commitments in the HCP. We cannot require additional actions or funds be expended without the permittee’s consent; so it is important to identify upfront in the plan all reasonably foreseeable changed circumstances that may occur during the permit term and feasible responses to them. The no surprises regulation prohibits us from requiring mitigation involving any additional commitment of land, water, or financial resources or additional restrictions on the use of land, water, or other natural resources beyond the level otherwise agreed on in the HCP. If a condition arises that should have been-but was not identified as a changed circumstance in the HCP, we cannot require the permittee to address it. This makes the process to identify changed circumstances during plan development extremely important. 9.6.2 Unforeseen Circumstances Unforeseen circumstances are changes in circumstances affecting a species or geographic area covered by an HCP that could not reasonably have been anticipated during HCP development, and that result in a substantial and adverse change in the status of the species (e.g., the eruption of Mount St. Helens) or conditions upon which the species rely. In such cases, the permittee is not required to come up with additional resources or funds to remedy unforeseen circumstances, but the Services and the permittee should work together to determine an appropriate response within the original resource commitments in the HCP. It may also be necessary for the Services to attempt to come up with additional resources to help remedy the situation. The Services must demonstrate that an unforeseen circumstance has occurred using the best scientific and commercial data available, and the permittee must notify us if they think unforeseen circumstances have been triggered.

These findings must be clearly documented and based on reliable technical information regarding the status and habitat requirements of the affected species. Our considerations include, but aren’t limited to, the following factors: 1. size of the current range of the affected species, 2. percentage of range adversely affected by the conservation plan, 3. percentage of range conserved by the conservation plan, 4. ecological significance of that portion of the range affected by the conservation plan, 5. level of knowledge about the affected species and the degree of specificity of the species’ conservation program under the conservation, and 6. whether failure to adopt additional conservation measures would appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival and recovery of the affected species in the wild. The “unforeseen circumstances” section of the HCP should discuss the process for figuring out how to address those future changes in circumstances surrounding the HCP we may not reasonably anticipate. When unforeseen circumstances happen, we cannot require the permittee to provide additional land, water, or financial resources or additional restrictions on the use of land, water, or other natural resource otherwise available for their use under the original terms of 9-37 the permit. However, there may be other approaches we can use to respond to the needs of the affected species, including increasing the effectiveness of the HCP’s operating conservation program (without raising costs), Government actions we can take to meet species needs, or voluntary conservation measures the permittee can take. Key points: ● stick to the regulatory language for changed and unforeseen circumstances, ● identify a comprehensive list of circumstances, ● identify thresholds to make it clear when something is changed vs. unforeseen (e.g., 100- year flood in a long duration HCP vs. 500-year flood), ● develop a plan for how we or the permittee will respond to each circumstance, and ● secure funding for responding to changed circumstances. In the event that continuation of the permit in the face of a changed or unforeseen circumstance would result in jeopardy to a listed species, and the jeopardy cannot be avoided through the response to the changed circumstances provided in the plan or voluntary actions of the permittee in response to the change circumstance or unforeseen circumstance or through the actions of the Service or others, then the permit must be revoked. 9.6.3 Steps to Identify and Plan for Changed and Unforeseen Circumstances During HCP Development 1. Identify all changed circumstances using the changed circumstances checklist (Table 9.6.4a) or similar.

2. Develop thresholds for clearly identifying when circumstances are changed vs. unforeseen. 3. Develop response for each- what will be the response to ensure goals and objectives are met if circumstance X happens to Y degree? 4. Develop funding estimate for each response. 9.6.4 Differentiating Between a Changed and an Unforeseen Circumstance One way to differentiate between a changed and unforeseen circumstance is to use a risk assessment or probability of that condition occurring. ● For example, you might consider that the probability of a 100-year interval flood event is likely to occur within the life of a long-term permit, but a 500-year flood is not. Keep in mind, however, that in some locations the risk of what previously was considered a 500- year or 100-year flood event may now be expected to occur much more frequently due to climate change. ● Similarly, you may find that fire up to a certain acreage or with specific return frequencies are likely to occur during the permit term, but fires above that size or at more frequent intervals would be unforeseen circumstances. ● Weather events such as tornadoes, tropical cyclones, and blizzards, can be expected to recur in certain regions and models may help understand the expected changes of frequency and intensity from climate change. 9-38 It is possible that no response will be needed for a particular changed circumstance, such as flooding in a healthy river system or fire in a fire-adapted community, if vegetation is likely to regenerate naturally and covered species will recover and possibly benefit from the event. However, it is key that the applicant carefully consider potential changed circumstances and that the HCP includes a robust set of plan responses to those changes.

Changed and unforeseen circumstances apply to the mitigation lands and also to the administration and operation of an HCP. The changed and unforeseen circumstances checklist may be useful to ensure the HCP includes the appropriate information and planners ask the right questions (see Table 9.6.4a). Like other aspects of the conservation program, effectiveness of management actions in reducing the effects of impacts from elements identified as changed circumstances can be improved through implementation of the monitoring and adaptive management programs. 9-39 Table 9.6.4a: Changed circumstances checklist. Element Condition within which will be considered a If changed How will Cost If threshold ‘changed’ circumstance circumstance remedial estimate for changed occurs, action be for circumstance Size Frequency Duration Intensity remedial funded? remedial is surpassed actions will action then: include: Contaminant spill Disease Drought Dramatic economic change Earthquake/tsunami Expansion/succession of vegetation community Fire Flooding High winds Invasive species introduction New species listing/ designation of critical habitat Sea level rise Temperature ● Excessive heat ● Excessive cold Tornado/Hurricane Volcanic eruption Not all of these will apply to your HCP, and some may be missing. 9.6.5 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and Changed Circumstances The NEPA analysis conducted on the issuance of the section 10(a)(1)(B) permit should include the realm of changed circumstances and all resulting activities to avoid the need for a future amendment to the NEPA document associated with the Services’ issuance of the permit. 9-40  9.6.6 Considering Climate Change in Changed Circumstances When developing the list of changed circumstances and the remedial actions to reduce their effects, changing climatic conditions need to be considered.

Of the elements considered for changed circumstances, what is their current trajectory or trend? If the current trend continues, or if projections indicate an acceleration in the trend, how might that affect the management response at year xx? For those elements that you’re not considering as changed circumstances, does thinking about their trend or trajectory bring them into the realm of changed circumstances? For example, looking at the frequency of fire events over the last 25 years may be all you need to understand fire trends in the area. See Figure 9.6a. Figure 9.6a Example 1: Fire events This figure suggests an increased frequency of burns. Sometimes the situation takes more examination to really understand meaningful trends: 9-41 Figure 9.6a Example 2: Fire events In the second example, the average number of fire events doesn’t tell the whole story. Only after looking at the number of acres damaged from those same fire events do we see a significant trend in fire activity. This is an indication of increased intensity of burns rather than increased frequency. In this case and others, the average is probably not the best threshold for demonstrating changed circumstances have been exceeded, as it is possible that the average would be exceed at least half of the time. Climate change on its own is not a useful way to frame changed circumstances.

Examining how climate changes predicted to affect specific variables like fire or flooding is much more useful. For example, scientific modeling of fire and climate change has projected a substantial risk of increase in conditions for very large fires (the top 5 - 10 percent of the largest fires) across many parts of the United States in the coming decades, as well as an extending the “fire season.” When assessing climate change effects in changed circumstances, it is important to consider the best available scientific information, including the historical record, the recent trajectory or trend, and the projected future trajectory for specific variables that are relevant for the region and timeframe of interest (see 9.6.7). 9.6.7 Timing of Changed Circumstances 9-42 Changed circumstances can occur during the permit term. Changed circumstances do not apply after the permit term ends. After the permit term ends, management changes needed to ensure performance of conservation land should be memorialized in the conservation easement or similar governing document and funding provided to address post permit management needs must be provided (usually from an endowment). 9.6.8 Information Needs for Changed and Unforseen Circumstances The HCP needs to include enough information to: ● identify potential elements that may be encountered during the permit term ● identify when changed or unforeseen circumstances are triggered ● make clear when an element is changed vs. unforeseen (e.g., intensity, size, duration, frequency) ● identify what the management response(s) will be to reduce the effects ● provide a cost estimate of the remedial action ● understand where funding will come from to remediate changed circumstances and assure such funding 9.6.9 Determining Changed vs. Unforeseen Circumstances Changed circumstances must be reasonably anticipated. Any source of information that is useful for anticipating potential conditions can be used as the basis for determining changed vs. unforeseen circumstances.

Specific sources include: ● weather records over the past xx years, ● disease trends, ● population trends, ● proximity of species to the plan area, ● historical fire data, ● sea level rise models, ● projections of drought and megadrought, etc. For climate change considerations, past events may not always be useful, but they may help predict future events. The Services have specialists who can help provide the best available scientific information regarding relevant trends and projections and how to interpret and use them in the context of changed vs. unforeseen circumstances. 9.6.10 “No Surprises” and Changed Circumstances The no surprises regulations provide the permittee with assurances that, assuming the plan is being properly implemented, the Services will not require additional measures or funding beyond what was agreed to in the HCP without the permittee’s consent. Changed circumstances must be written into the plan, including remedial measures and funding for those measures. If we determine that continued implementation of the plan will jeopardize the existence of a covered species or adversely modify its critical habitat, there are two options: 9-43  1. the Service can revoke the permit coverage for that species, or 2. the permittee can voluntarily implement additional measures beyond what they committed to in the HCP if they are sufficient to remedy the pending jeopardy of the species/adverse modification (permittee retains permit). If we determine that continued implementation of the plan would take, jeopardize the existence of a non-covered species or adversely modify its critical habitat, there are three options: 1. the Service can revoke the permit coverage for those activities that are taking the species, 2. the permittee can voluntarily implement additional measures beyond what was committed to in the HCP if they are sufficient to remedy the pending jeopardy of the species/adverse modification (permittee retains permit), or 3. the permittee can amend the HCP to include the species at risk as a covered species and reduce the impacts to a level less than jeopardy/adverse modification (permittee retains permit). HCPs should identify the listing of non-covered species and designation/revision of critical habitat within the plan area during the permit term as changed circumstances. This upfront thinking helps make clear what the steps are to react and accommodate a newly listed species or critical habitat designation while keeping the permit in good standing.

17-3 Committees that the applicant or a non-Federal stakeholder forms and operates are not be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act. We should participate, but we should not oversee or “manage” such committees. They should be organized by the applicant or other non-Federal stakeholder. Oversight committees should meet regularly and review implementation of the monitoring program and filing of reports as defined in the HCP and incidental take permit. The committees should meet annually, although they may meet less often depending on management results, frequency of changed circumstances, or increased confidence in the plan’s management methods. 17.3 Adaptive Management, Changed Circumstances, and No Surprises in Practice As we describe in Chapter 9, adaptive responses to changed circumstances are incorporated into the HCP and become part of the operating conservation program. Adaptive management measures become a permit requirement just as much as any restriction on earth moving or tree cutting. Like other aspects of the conservation program, effectiveness of management actions in reducing the effects of changed circumstances can be improved through implementation of the monitoring and adaptive management programs. However, there are limits to the changes we can expect from a permittee. No surprises assurances limit the scope of possible changes to an operating HCP after we issue the permit.

No Surprises assurances do not restrict changes to the HCP that result from the plan’s adaptive management program or that consist of responses to changed circumstances identified in the plan. Instead, no surprises assurances limit our ability to require measures beyond those provided for in the HCP’s operating conservation program if changed circumstances that were not identified in the HCP or unforeseen circumstances occur. These are the expectations for performance under no surprises assurances: ● Changed circumstances provided for in the HCP: Adaptive measures provided for in the HCP will be implemented by the permittee as specified in the HCP. ● Changed circumstances not provided for in the HCP: The Services may suggest adaptive measures, but they are not required without the permittee’s consent. ● Unforeseen circumstances: Adaptive measures that are outside the scope of the HCP’s operating conservation program can be negotiated, but will not be required without the permittee’s consent. However, we may require additional measures limited to modifications within the conserved habitat areas, if any, or to the HCP’s operating conservation program, and that maintain the original terms of the HCP to the maximum extent possible if those modifications do not result in the commitment of additional land, water, or financial compensation. The Services must demonstrate that unforeseen circumstances exist. The adaptive measures or changed circumstances sections of the HCP should have established notice and coordination procedures so that the Services and permittee can each propose changes, and reach agreement on how to implement what’s needed. There may be scheduled reviews linked to periodic performance reports, or a stakeholder might at any time identify an issue that needs attention from the Services and the permittee. 17-4 We must determine whether unforeseen circumstances have occurred, based on the HCP’s plan for identifying and addressing changed circumstances (see Chapter 9, section 9.6).

We will notify the permittee about the need to discuss possible responses and, if there are available responses, whether the permittee is willing to implement them regardless of their no surprises assurances (see sections 9.6.2 through 9.6.4 in Chapter 9). We can require certain changes that remain within the scope of the HCP’s conservation plan that do not require increased expenditures of funds, lands, or waters than to which the permittee previously agreed. The “no surprises” rule does not prevent the permittee from voluntarily taking action or committing additional land, water, and financial resources to help remedy the situation. We will work with other Federal agencies, the States, and appropriate parties to muster available resources to help respond to the impacts from unforeseen circumstances. To maintain interagency cooperation under section 6 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA), we will use the expertise and solicit information and participation from involved State agencies in all aspects of the HCP planning process, including dealing with unforeseen circumstances. If continuation of the permit is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a covered species, we can revoke a permit that is being properly implemented because of an unforeseen circumstance. This is a last resort that we should only take if all our efforts cannot prevent jeopardy of a covered species. We should do all we can in recruiting other Federal and state agencies, interested parties, and available resources to remedy the situation before taking this step. 17.4 Permit Amendments, Renewals, Transferals Many incidental take permits extend for years or decades, so the HCP should give consideration to the potentials for changes, renewals, or possible permit transfers.
